# Deliverable 1 - Project Proposal
## Domain of Interest - Food Assistance and Nutrition in the US

### Why are we interested in this field/domain?

Our team is interested in exploring food insecurity to better understand the social factors influencing unequal access to nutritious foods in the United States. We strive to do this by examining correlations between factors such as socioeconomic status, geographic location, education, and ethnicity. Additionally, our team is curious about the success of food assistance programs across the US. Because the implementation of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) leaves room for state interpretation, the quality of accessible food through SNAP varies by state. We are interested in learning if the overall goal of providing access to nutritious foods is being met.

### What other examples of data driven project have we found related to this domain?

**1. [Washington Food Distribution](https://nras.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=b1ad1be260fe4ef8b877fc7064b0649f)**

This ArcGIS map of Washington depicts the geographical distribution of all WA food assistance establishments, from food banks to tribal organizations. Each point on the map also provides contact, locational, and miscellaneous information about the establishment it represents.

**2. [Washington State Food Security Survey](https://news.wsu.edu/2020/11/19/wsu-helping-washington-families-facing-food-insecurity/)**

This is a joint study conducted by UW, WSU, and Tacoma Community College. Its team, 'WAFOOD Survey Team,' conducted the first-of-its-kind state-wide survey about food insecurity in Washington. For example, it reveals that 30% of WA households have experienced food insecurity since the implementation of the stay-at-home order due to COVID-19 pandemic.

**3. [Northwest Harvest's Interactive Maps of Food Insecurity in Washington State](https://www.livestories.com/statistics/hunger-in-washington/washington/food-insecurity)**

Northwest Harvest is a nonprofit focused on supporting food banks in Washington state. Its aim is to promote having access to nutritious food as a human right. Because of this, Northwest Harvest utilized public data to communicate the issue of food insecurity in Washington State. Its visualization shows data on the number of residents who are experience food insecurity, have low access to grocery stores, and receive food assistance through Basic Foods (also known as SNAPs).

**4. [Fruit and Vegetable Incentive Program](https://www.doh.wa.gov/ForPublicHealthandHealthcareProviders/PublicHealthSystemResourcesandServices/Funding/FruitandVegetableIncentivesProgram)**

To incentivize nutritious eating, Washington State implemented a fruit and vegetable incentive program. With financial support from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, SNAP users receive extra resources to spend on produce. These benefits apply to grocery stores and farmers markets state-wide.

### What data-driven questions do we hope to answer about this domain?

  - What geographical areas more prone to food insecurity and inequality?
  - How do demographics and distance affect access to food assistance?
  - How do demographics affect the _quality_ of food assistance (freshness, nutrition content, price, eligibility).
  - Is SNAP's goal of enabling families to purchase healthy food successful?


## Finding Data

### **Source 1 - [Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture](https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/interactive-charts-and-highlights)**

**Data Collection Method:** This file contains five datasets with statistics on food security in the US calculated by USDA's Economic Research Service (ERS). This data comes from the Current Population Survey Food Security Supplement (CPS-FSS) from the U.S. Census Bureau, sponsored by ERS.

**Number of Observations:** 40-500+ (per dataset)

**Number of Features:** ~10 (per dataset)

**Questions:**
- How many children were in a food insecure household in a given year?
- How has this number changed over time?
- What proportion of food insecure households have children?


### **Source 2 - [Food Environment Atlas 2018, U.S. Department of Agriculture](https://www.kaggle.com/carrie1/food-environment-atlas )**

**Data Collection Method:** This data was generated by The US Department of Agriculture and downloaded from Kaggle, a data science community. This file contains nine datasets concerning the relationship between access to healthy food and various demographic factors. The Food Environment Atlas informs researchers, who then inform policymakers about healthy food initiatives.

**Number of Observations:** 3,100+ (in the `Access` dataset)

**Number of Features:** ~362 (total)

**Questions:**
- What is the correlation between food prices and health?
- Children from which communities are more vulnerable to food insecurity?
- What are common factors of a food desert?


### **Source 3 - [Feeding America](https://map.feedingamerica.org)**

**Data Collection Method:** This folder contains 10 data files (for years 2009-2018) about food insecurity at the county, congressional district, and state levels. The data comes from research done by Feeding America, a nonprofit organization with a network of over 200 foodbanks. Feeding America drew local food insecurity and expenditure estimates from the Current Population Survey (CPS), American Community Survey (ACS), and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).

**Number of Observations (2018):**
 - County: 3144
 - Congressional District: 438
 - State: 50

**Number of Features (2018)**
- County: 18
- Congressional District: 16
- State: 18

**Questions:**
- Which regions of the US experience the most food insecurity?
   - Which counties?
- Where does the budget fall short of needed food assistance?
- How much money is needed to ensure that those who experience food insecurity are fed?
- How has food insecurity in the US changed over time?

### **Source 4 - [US Public Food Assistance](https://www.kaggle.com/jpmiller/publicassistance)**

**Data Collection Method:** Kaggle, an online data science and machine learning community, downloaded data directly from the US Census Bureau and US Department of Agriculture. No further information is given.

**Number of Observations:** 51

**Number of Features:** 6

**Questions**
- In what year was `average participation` highest?
- What about `total benefits`?
- What is the ratio of `total benefits` to `total costs` in the past 10 years?

_Image sources:_
- [Introduction Image](https://travel.usnews.com/dims4/USNEWS/7dd8dad/2147483647/resize/255x255%5E%3E/crop/255x255/quality/85/?url=https://travel.usnews.com/images/pike_place_2_getty_bSSEVFV.jpg)
- [Conclusion Image](https://media.istockphoto.com/photos/sunset-illuminates-a-green-crop-field-picture-id171107519?k=6&m=171107519&s=612x612&w=0&h=CriS5XFC-avee5dV1Sa20oNWXfX92WJjDSRo5k3Z1eE=)
